In the last lecture, you learned about ARP,
the Address Resolution Protocol, and how it's required to allow communication between two hosts over
an Ethernet network.
In the last lecture, you saw how it works when both hosts are on the same IP subnet.
In this lecture, we'll cover how it works when they're on different IP subnets.
So you already knew that
that means that the traffic is going to have to go via a router.
So, we'll work through an example for this. In the example, 172.23.4.1
wants to send a packet to 192.168.10.1,
so that's two different IP subnets. You see the sender over there on the left, the receiver is on the right,
and we've got a router which is going to route traffic between those two subnets. We can't have ARP
working the way it did earlier when both hosts were on the same subnet. If the sender on the left sends
out a normal ARP request for 192.168.10.1, that will go out as a Layer 2
broadcast, and it wouldn't be forwarded by the router. So, the ARP request would never get to the
receiver.
So obviously, that isn't going to work.
Also, we know that when we send traffic between two different IP subnets, it has to be sent via a router.
So, the sender is not going to send an ARP request for 192.168.10.1. It knows
not to do that because it compares its own IP address and subnet mask with the destination IP address,
and it can see that it's on a different IP subnet. The sender knows that it has to send the traffic
via a router, so it doesn't send an ARP request for the final destination. It sends an ARP request for
its default gateway. The sender at 172.23.4.1 will send an ARP request
for 172.23.4.254, which is its default gateway. That comes from
a source MAC of 1111.2222.3333 of the sender. The destination MAC is, as usual, for an ARP request,
FFFF.FFFF.FFFF,
the Layer 2 broadcast address. And in the ARP request, it says it's a request for
172.23.4.25, asking it for its MAC address. That will hit everything in
the 172.23.4.0 subnet, including the router. The router will see it's an ARP request
for itself, so it will send an ARP reply. That comes from its source MAC of the
172.23.4.254 IP address, which was 4444.5555.6666, and the destination MAC address is 1111.2222.333.
The router knows to send it there because that source MAC was in the original ARP request. The
sender will have been holding the IP packet that's intended for the final destination while it sent out
the original ARP request there. It now knows where to send it to for the destination MAC address, so it
will now send that IP packet. The IP packet will come from a source IP address of the sender,
172.23.4.1. The destination IP address is the IP address of the final destination,
so that will be 192.168.10.1. The source MAC is 1111.2222.3333, and the destination
MAC is for that sender's default gateway, which was 4444.5555.6666. So that packet will hit the router,
and the router sees that it needs to send it to 192.168.10.1. The router does not know the
MAC address of 192.168.10.1 because it hasn't communicated with it before
in our example, so it's not in the ARP cache. So, the router will hold the IP packet from the sender
on the left, and it will send an ARP request for 192.168.10.1. That will go out its
interface on the right, which has got IP address 192.168.10.254, so it's in the
same IP subnet as the final destination. It will say it's an ARP request for
192.168.10.1, it comes from the source MAC of the router's IP address,
192.168.10.254.
That was MAC address 4444.5555.7777,
and it's an ARP request,
so it goes to a destination MAC of the Layer 2 broadcast, FFFF.FFFF.FFFF. That will hit everything
in the 192.168.10 subnet, including the receiver over on the right. The receiver on
the right
will see it's an ARP request for its IP address of 192.168.10.1, so it will send the ARP
reply. The ARP reply comes from its source MAC of 2222.3333.4444, and it goes to the destination MAC of the
router's interface on the right hand side there, which was 4444.5555.7777.
The router now knows the MAC address of the final destination on the right,
so it will send the IP packet. The IP information in the packet never changes. The source IP address is
always the original sender, which is 172.23.4.1
in our example, and the destination IP is always the final destination address, which was
192.168.10.1.
The source MAC is the router's interface on the right hand side, which was 4444.5555.7777, and the destination
MAC is 2222.3333.4444. So, you may be noticed, let's go back a slide in the example,
like I said, the source and the destination IP address never change end to end,
but the MAC address source and destination will change physical hop by physical hop.
We'll have another look at that in more detail in the next lecture as well.
Okay, so that is how ARP works for routed traffic.
If you want to view the ARP cache on a Cisco router, the command is simply 'show arp', and to clear the
ARP cache, it's 'clear arp-cache'.
Let's have a look at that now in the lab.
This is a continuation of the last lab where we covered DNS
and where we had our R1 at 10.10.10.1, R2
is at 10.10.10.2, and R3
is at 10.10.20.1.
So if I jump onto R1 here, and I'll do a 'show arp', it's already done pings to R1 and
R2.
And let me just make this full screen and do it again to make it show up a bit more cleanly. You
can see that it's got entries in here for 10.10.10.1, where you can see the MAC address,
and its reachable interface FastEthernet0/0, and also 10.10.10.2, the MAC
address there, and the interface it's reachable out of. We could also have a look at R3 as well,
so let me just bring that back up again. And if I go onto R3 and do a 'show arp' on here, I need
to go to enable prompt first, so let's say 'end', and then 'show arp', and R3 is in the 10.10.10.20 subnet.
So on there,
let me just make this full screen again just so you can see a bit more cleanly. You can see it's got entries
for 10.10.20.1 and 10.10.20.2. So, that's how you see the ARP table on a
Cisco router. It's very simple, just a 'show arp', that will show you the known IP address, the MAC address,
and the interface that it is reachable on.